Harvard symbolism professor Robert Langdon wakes up in a hospital in Florence, Italy with a head wound and no memory of the last few days. Dr. Sienna Brooks, one of the doctors tending to him, reveals that he is suffering from amnesia and hearing a woman's voice repeatedly saying "seek and find". When Vayentha, an assassin, shows up in the hospital and kills one of the doctors, while attempting to kill Langdon, Brooks helps Langdon escape, and they flee to her apartment. Brooks plays a tape recording on which Langdon repeats what sounds like "Very sorry".
Langdon finds a cylinder with a biohazard sign in his jacket and decides to call the U.S. consulate. He learns that they are searching for him, but, prompted by Brooks, claims to be across the street from her apartment, to avoid getting her more involved. Soon, Langdon sees Vayentha pull up to the location he gave the consulate. He deduces that the U.S. government wants to kill him. Langdon opens the container and finds a small medieval bone cylinder fitted with a hi-tech projector (Faraday Pointer) that displays a modified version of Botticelli's Map of Hell, which is based on Dante's Inferno. A trail of clues leads them toward the Old City.
The Palazzo Vecchio in Florence
He goes there with Brooks, but they see that a team of soldiers, and the Florentine Carabinieri are searching for them. They flee, and Langdon examines the "Map of Hell" again, noticing several changes to the layers. Langdon discovers an anagram, 'Catro vace'. They manage to evade the soldiers and get into the Palazzo Vecchio using the Vasari Corridor. They discover the phrase in the painting The Battle of Marciano by Vasari, located in the 'Hall of the Five Hundred'.
At the Palazzo, Langdon meets a guide of the museum, Marta Alvarez, who recognizes him, having met him and Ignazio Busoni, the director of Il Duomo, the previous night, when she showed them Dante's death mask. Langdon asks to see the mask again, to retrace his steps, but they find the mask gone, and security footage shows Langdon and Busoni stealing the mask. Fleeing, Langdon and Sienna listen to a message left by Busoni, referring to "Paradise 25".
Gates of Paradise at Florence Baptistry
Langdon and Brooks escape the guards, but the soldiers arrive, and chase them across the attic. Vayentha also arrives, and while she attempts to shoot Langdon, Brooks pushes her to her death. Langdon connects the phrase "Paradise 25" to the Florence Baptistry, where they find the Dante mask containing a hidden riddle from its current owner, a billionaire geneticist named Bertrand Zobrist. Brooks explains that Zobrist was a geneticist who advocated the halting of humanity's growth, and that he was rumored to be working on an engineered disease to do so.
Ferris, an agent keeping track of Langdon follows them in and helps them escape the soldiers. They follow the riddle solution to Venice. Brooks punches Ferris in his damaged ribs, with Brooks claiming he is suffering from massive internal bleeding, causing Langdon to suspect Ferris has been infected with Zobrist's plague. Langdon is captured by a group of soldiers while Brooks escapes.
Langdon is taken to Dr. Elizabeth Sinskey, the director-general of the WHO. She explains that Zobrist, who committed suicide the week before, had supposedly developed a new biological plague that will cause infertility in a third of the worlds' population, in order to solve the problem of the world's impending overpopulation, citing the Doomsday Argument. Sinskey raided Zobrist's safe deposit box, found the cylinder and flew Langdon to Florence to follow the clues. However, he stopped communicating with Sinskey after meeting with Alvarez and Ignazio and the WHO feared he betrayed them and was working with Zobrist. The soldiers were the WHO's emergency response team, and not meant to kill him.
Zobrist had paid a shadowy consulting group "The Consortium" to protect the cylinder until a certain date. He also left a video filled with disturbing Dante imagery, and then showed a picture of the plague container kept in a hidden underwater location. It is a slowly dissolving bag. The video claims that the world will be changed the following morning. When Sinskey retrieved it, the Consortium abducted Langdon and staged every event up to this point, to motivate him to solve it. 